# OpenCloudOS Release Note 202204
OpenCloudOS Minimal ISO Release.

## Download
OpenCloudOS 8.5 Download [URL](http://mirrors.opencloudos.org/opencloudos/8.5/isos/)


## Major changes

### Security
The system-wide cryptographic policies support scopes and wildcards for directives in custom policies. You can now enable different sets of algorithms for different back ends.

The Rsyslog log processing application has been updated to version 8.2102.0-5. This update introduces, among other improvements, the OpenSSL network stream driver. This implements TLS-protected transport using the OpenSSL library into Rsyslog.

### Network
NetworkManager now supports configuring a device to accept all traffic. You can configure this feature using, for example, the **nmcli** utility.
The **firewalld** service supports forwarding traffic between different interfaces or sources within a zone.
The **firewalld** service supports filtering traffic that is forwarded between zones.

### Kernel
OpenCloudOS 8.5 is distributed with the kernel version kernel-5.4.119-19.0010 .

#### BUGFIX
1. Fixed type defined caused compile failed  [Important]
2. Fixed per-cgroup pagecache limit [Important]
3. Fixed Disk hang ioutil output %0  [Important]
4. Fixed CVE-2022-25636 [Highlevel]
5. Fixed CVE-2022-27666 [Highlevel]

#### FEATURE
1. Update TOA Feature
2. Set x86 ENA_ETHERNET CONFIG
3. Enable VMMOUSE、SOFTLOCKUP_DETECTOR、BPF_KPROBE_OVERRIDE  CONFIG


### Programming languages, webService and database servers
The following components are now available as new module streams:

- **Ruby 3.0**
- **nginx 1.20**
- **Node.js 16**

The following components have been upgraded:

- **PHP** to version 7.4.19
- **Squid** to version 4.15
- **Mutt** to version 2.0.7

Compilers and development tools:

The following compiler toolsets have been updated:

- **GCC** Toolset 11
- **LLVM** Toolset 12.0.1
- **Rust** Toolset 1.54.0
- **Go** Toolset 1.16.7

### OpenSouce
All of OpenCloudOS 8 location:

- [https://git.opencloudos.tech](https://git.opencloudos.tech)
- [https://github.com/OpenCloudOS](https://github.com/OpenCloudOS)

## Thanks
Thanks every developers and member of the community , their efforts, participation and support is very important . 
