# OpenCloudOS v8.6 Release Note

## Overview
On December 22, 2021, the open source operating system community OpenCloudOS was officially announced. Tencent and PowerLeader, Chuxinshiming, RedFlag-OS, Phytium, Inspur, Loongson Technology, OPPO, Xianjinkaiyuan, Zhongdiankeshentai, NFS-China , Zhaoxin and other more than 20 operating system ecological manufacturers and users became the first founding units.

The open source operating system community OpenCloudOS is a completely neutral, fully open, secure, stable, high-performance operating system and ecosystem. At the beginning of its establishment, OpenCloudOS decided to become a completely open and neutral open source community, and has confirmed the acceptance of community project donations through the TOC review of the Open Atom Open Source Foundation. Under the trust and supervision of the foundation, OpenCloudOS will operate in a standard open source community model, and will be co-governed and built with community participating units.

The operating system is the core basic software, and its importance has been recognized by the industry. However, for relevant manufacturers and individual users, the potential risks of the current supply chain cannot be underestimated. By the end of 2021, the mainstream operating system software CentOS in the industry will stop maintenance, which makes a large number of users fall into security risks. In this context, Tencent and its partners jointly initiated the launch of OpenCloudOS, an open source operating system community.

As a domestic open source operating system community, OpenCloudOS has accumulated the advantages of Tencent and many manufacturers in software and open source ecology, and has solid support in cloud native, stability, performance, hardware support, etc., and can support all hardware platforms equally and comprehensively.

The OpenCloudOS V8 user mode remains 100% binary compatible with the RHEL 8 version, and the kernel adopts the 5.4 LTS version developed by the OpenCloudOS community to provide better performance.

## Download
To download OpenCloudOS V8.6, please visit:

- [https://mirrors.opencloudos.tech/opencloudos/](https://mirrors.opencloudos.tech/opencloudos/)
- [http://mirrors.tencent.com/opencloudos/](http://mirrors.tencent.com/opencloudos/)

## Major changes
### Security
1. SELinux, the fapolicyd framework, and Policy-Based Decryption (PBD) for automated unlocking of LUKS-encrypted drives support the SAP HANA database management system.
2. Packages for fapolicyd have been upgraded to the upstream version 1.1. Among other improvements, you can now use the new rules.d/ and trust.d/ directories, the fagenrules script, and new options for the fapolicyd-cli command.
3. OpenSSH servers now support drop-in configuration files.
4. The pcsc-lite packages have been rebased to upstream version 1.9.5, which provides many enhancements and bug fixes.
5. You can now verify the versions of installed SELinux policy modules with the newly added --checksum option to the semodule command.
6. The SCAP Security Guide (SSG) packages have been rebased to upstream version 0.1.60, and the OpenSCAP packages have been rebased to upstream version 1.3.6.

### Dynamic programming languages, web and database servers
Later versions of the following components are now available as new module streams:

- PHP 8.0
- Perl 5.32

Compilers and development tools:

- GCC Toolset 11
- LLVM Toolset 13.0.1
- Rust Toolset 1.58.1
- Go Toolset 1.17.7

### Kernel
1. Fixed the use after free problem of tcp free skb, fixed the problem of virtio length, fixed the problem of virtio-net XDP queues, the acs problem of Feiteng architecture, and the failure of interrupt distribution.
2. The bpf supports the nettrace function, which allows developers to track the cause of network packet loss through bpf (the kernel also turns related packet loss trace points)
3. The sli active monitoring function is supported, allowing performance monitoring indicators to be set through the sli interface, and the kernel will actively notify when a performance problem is detected, thereby reducing the periodic monitoring overhead of user-mode components.
4. The cgroup thp function is supported. This function can control the thp usage status of all processes in a container, allowing users to enable thp at the container granularity.

## BUGFIX
OpenCloudOS bug tracking system:

- [http://bugs.opencloudos.tech/](http://bugs.opencloudos.tech/)

If you encounter any problems with the OpenCloudOS release, you sincerely welcome more valuable suggestions from users and developers in the community. We still have a lot to improve and perfect.


## Source code
All OpenCloudOS 8 source code is hosted on gitee:

- [https://gitee.com/src-opencloudos-rpms](https://gitee.com/src-opencloudos-rpms)
- [https://gitee.com/src-opencloudos-modules](https://gitee.com/src-opencloudos-modules)

## Thanks
Thanks to every partner member of the community for their efforts, participation and support. Without your hard work, we wouldn't have been able to release a complete release in such a short period of time.
